From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
Sean. Number 79. Recorded live
Wednesday, August 29th, 2007. Support for Hansel
minutes is provided by Tellerik
already controls the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web application.
online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers journal the world's
leading.net developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott and
Carl, talk about linked to
XML. Hi, this is Carl Franklin
and you're listening to Hansel
minutes from Hansel and it's
dot com. Scott and I
are here to talk about
linked to XML. Hi Scott.
Hey, how's it going? I'm
doing well. Thanks. How are
you? I am ensconced in
XML. I am up to
my ears in this stuff.
I always have been well.
Yeah, but you know, you
don't really learn stuff until
you really, really sit down
and try to apply something
significant to it. And one
of the things that you
can trouble with now that
I'm expecting, I'm going to
get in trouble with, with,
with the blogging. And a
couple of people have mentioned
it. They said, well, you're
gonna go to work for
Microsoft now. But the thing
that made your blog really
interesting was that you were
doing real work with these
technologies. So the things that
I would bump into were
kind of corner cases of,
of real life, right? If
you get into the whole
kind of like let's write
books and give talks and
blog, you know, what software
are you really trying to
create? So I'm trying to
build some stuff and I'm
using linked to XML and
I'm, you know, figuring out
cause I was a big
XML guy before when I
say big XML guy, I
mean a big system dot
XML guy. I love XML
reader, XML writer, huge XML
serializer guy. When people were
dogging the XML sterilizer, I
was doing all sorts of
crazy stuff with it. So
I mean, I'm a huge
fan of that. So when
I started playing with linked
to XML, I was kinda
trying to get my mind
around it. And I'm realizing
that it's really two things.
There's the new classes, there's
a whole series of new
classes, right? So there's a
new namespace system.xml.link. And there's
some new classes like X
document X element X attribute,
but, and those things are
really separate. A whole separate
XML. API has been imagined
completely separate from link. This
has nothing to do with
link though, right? Cause link
is about a syntax and
some APIs and about compiler
support. But what I'm trying
to say is that even
if link didn't exist yeah.
X document XL, et cetera.
But those things in that
new model would be still
very interesting. It's still, still
much better than X path.
Well, yeah, it's, it's very
interesting though that the concepts
are there, but remember one
of the things that was
wrong with X path is
that you would tunnel a,
another programming language in a
string, right? So you'd say
like select nodes quote, and
then you'd put some magic
X path goo in there.
And that was a little,
little tiny program, you know,
within a string. And there
was this notion of an
axis and X path. So
when you do a select
and you're moving around the
document either like via descendants
or via siblings, so there's
this kind of direction. You
have to have the sense
of where I'm moving in,
what direction on the tree
that exists in the context
of an X document and
X elements via different methods
like descendants and elements. So
you can say, give me
all of the descendants of
this particular X element. Yeah.
So you can get X
path like experiences, but it's
very strongly typed now with,
with VB nine, you also
get the ability to use
like the imports method, the
imports declaration, which we ordinarily
use to import CLR namespaces
you can actually use that
to import XML namespaces. And
that has gotten me really
thinking about VB again, because
you know, I've given you
a hard time about VB,
but You don't have to
give me a hard time.
You give VB a hard
time. I think. Well, yeah,
I give, and I give
BB people of our time.
Cause I was a V
you know, I was a
big VV guy. I was
living the life, you know,
VB three up to VB
six, and then I just
kind of switched over. And
the next thing you know,
I was doing semi-colons and
I just kinda thought to
myself, you know, VB, so
what, you know, what's the
point, what is this silly
language for? And they really
just went running down the
street, screaming and added all
sorts of crazy stuff to
VB while C-sharp is staying
kind of very, I'm trying
to use words, It's a
classic, you know, C sharp
is going to see, I
was going to say formal,
formal uncluttered, maybe. Yeah. Noncontroversial.
Yeah. Noncontroversial. That's a good
one. Conservative, maybe conservative Nancy
that's that's the thing I'm
trying to think of words
that would get us. Not,
not a lot of mail,
but, but yeah. I mean,
without picking, we're trying very
carefully to pick the right
words, just to describe it.
It is, it is trying
to be multipurpose and classic
and a as a standard
and a formal, thoughtful way
of doing things while VB
I'm getting the impression. And
this is just, we're talking
about impressions and opinions here
is surprisingly unafraid to do
some pretty crazy stuff and
to make a formal declaration
that I want XML, you
know, baked really, really, really
tightly into the language, I
think is pretty cool. Now
it tighten us. It does
tighten the news a little
bit in the sense that
we are really tied to
the base class library, but
as with all computer languages,
it's not like it's easy
to keep track of what
syntax and what's underlying library.
I mean, just like in
M sharp, the using statement
caused a lot of controversy
because it's really just a
bit of syntactic sugar on
top of try, finally write
this imports. And the, the,
the XML literally is the
ability to go and say,
you know, Fu equals and
then just start typing XML,
having that be as syntactic
sugar on top of a
link or something on top
of specifically system at XML
that link in the X
document, next element stuff is
really tying you to the
platform, but it's not like
we weren't already tied to
the platform before. So I
don't know, it's kind of
a chicken and the egg
problem, but what I, what
I will say is that
writing it is just so
pleasant. I mean, I really
could see myself writing some
VB libraries if I, if
I really needed to do
some, some serious XML inside
them. So as you know,
I've, I was recently exposed
to this by Don XML
on DNR TV, and one
of the things, and if
you haven't seen those episodes
and you haven't seen the
link to XML, check it
out, DNR, tv.com. One of
the things that I really
like is the way they
contrast the XML, they, they
sort of fade it out.
So it doesn't, you know,
so there's a little bit
of contrast visually between the
XML that's literally in your
VB app and the rest
of your code. Yeah. You
know, that's a, that's funny,
that's a small kind of
aesthetic detail, but you're making
a very good point because
it, it, you, you would
think that all the angle
brackets and elements would make
a very funny looking syntax,
highlighted experience, but they're very
clear on the colors that
they chose or the default
colors. And it doesn't look
like an embedded string, and
it's very clear where the
XML starts and where your
code begins. And it is
really a very nice experience.
Don said something when we
first learned about XML literals
in VB, in that he
thought it was a bad
idea because people are going
to write code that now
looks like classic ASP, you
know, the, the classic spaghetti
code, the angle brackets, air
Springs with, you know, and,
and, and he told me
on the show that he
had such a change of
heart after he got to
play with it, because, you
know, it's not like that
at all. I mean, yes,
you can express XML and
you can plug data into
that XML, like in a
loop. So you can go
into a loop and output
this literal XML string, and
then plug the angle bracket
percent equals, you know, just
like you do an ASP.
Right. But it doesn't really
go the other way. You
know, it's not like it's,
I don't think, I don't
think, I don't know. It's
not like that. It's not
like classic ASP. No, It's
not. I mean, with any
tool, one can hurt themselves.
I mean, clearly, but one
of the things that's really
nice about this is that
it, for me, as someone
who has spent many years
trying to coerce objects into
angle brackets, it makes getting
an object into an angle
bracket format, especially when that
format doesn't necessarily look exactly
like the object. I mean,
certainly XML serializer has some
ability to massage things via
attributes and make the X
amount look the way you
want, but there's always been
this kind of gap. You
either serialize it as XML,
or you suddenly jump off
and you're into XML rider
world and you're, and you're
creating some pretty complicated and
pretty deep code just to
get some angle brackets out.
And it really lets you
understand why a lot of
people would spend time doing
what was considered evil, which
is building XML with string
builders, right? So it basically
gives you the ease of
string builder, style XML building
with the formalization, the kind
of IntelliSense, and, and then
the, you don't get a
string. You get an X
element when it, when it
pops out. One of the
things that I've been exploring,
because I don't want to
do just another show on
like, Hey, link is great.
Yay link. I wanted to
get a little bit deeper.
Is there are a lot
of extension methods, you know,
about extension methods, right? So
extension methods are the ability
to, and I've used the
term spot welding in the
past to, to refer to
it in the context of
Ruby where you can say,
you know, Hey, Carl has
a, let's say Carl has
a person class and it's
got first name and last
name, but I really want
it to have, I don't
know, surname, I could extend
it via, via derivation in
a kind of a classic,
Oh way. I could make
my own class and wrap
yours via kind of composition.
Or I can use an
extension method and basically say,
whenever you see a person
I wanted to have this
function, also this, this method
also, and basically kind of
just Velcro it to the
side of the object. And
initially it sounds very kind
of unnerving. You could think
of all the damage that
could potentially be done, but
within the context of what
Microsoft has done, where they've
taken a new library, ex
assistant.xml.link, and a whole bunch
of new classes, and they
wanted to make a relationship,
a bridge between that and
a system that XML, you
know, how do you make
that kind of strange relationship?
Is there, is there derivation?
Is there composition, are there
just a bunch of utility
classes? Where do you put
those utility classes? I mean,
do you make system.xml.link dot
bridge, and then make a
bunch of utility type stuff
with extension methods when you've
got some ex XML for
link objects, like if you've
got an X element or
you've got a, an X
document kind of lying around,
you can add a using
statement or in VBS case
and import statement and bring
in something like a system,
not XML dot that X
path. And it's suddenly extends
your existing linked to XML
objects with new stuff. So
for example, you've got like
an X document and you
bring in the X path
namespace. And by bringing that
namespace into scope, you've suddenly
added new methods on these
documents. So for example, the
X document then suddenly gets
an X path, select elements,
method, the method isn't there,
it's not on the X
document. It's actually an extension
method that was put in
the other library. So this
is a way that the,
the other library can influence
the future. This is the
way we can have X
path actual X path in
our X documents. And this
is used kind of consistently
throughout the namespaces that's in
a really interesting way. So
for example, if you wanted
to, well, like one of
the things I wanted to
do is serialize an object
in the middle of making
a bunch of X elements.
I posted about this in
my blog topic, right? So
I'm making a bunch of
X elements. I'm doing kind
of this tree building, but
I've got this object that
already serialized is just fine
and I want to go
in serialize it. So I
talked to the XML team,
they've got a great blog
on MSDN. It's called XML
team and using the XML
sterilizer. I want to serialize
an object, but I want
to add it into a
tree of X elements that
I'm already doing. Right. Well,
it turns out that if
you do a create writer
on an X document, you
can get out and XML
writer. So you can actually
ask a new style X
document for an XML writer.
And here's the cool part.
Anything you write to it
is actually going to turn
into X elements and X
documents. It's going to turn
into this new format as
soon as you close the
writer. So they basically got
an implementation of an XML
writer, and you're just writing
to it the way you've
always written to an X
amount of writer, except it's
going to be creating X
elements in the back. So
then will an XNL serializer
just takes a writer, right?
You can just write directly
to it. So what we
did is we just made
a serialize as X element
extension method to rather than
having a utility class floating
out there in the, in
the ether, we just extended.
XNL serializer, sorry. I just
said static class XML, serializer
extension. And then I made
this new share lies is
X element. And then in
the middle of my, my
building of my tree, I
can just go and say,
Oh yeah. And go ahead
and serialize this object. And
this provides a lot of
code review reuse because you
might be doing new work
and link, but you've got
existing work that is using
XML. Serializers, you've got existing
code that works just fine
rather than reimplementing that you
can, you can bridge it.
And I must say that
the bridging I've been really
impressed. It's really, really clever
and really clean being able
to call X path on
an X documents, being able
to serialize objects, use writers.
It feels like an evolution
kind of an extension of
system XML, but it doesn't
feel like I have to
go and relearn everything because
if you already know about
readers and writers, these things
are still there. And the
bridge methods are all brought
in just by including that
namespace. Yeah. That's excellent. Very
powerful. Yeah, it really is.
And I'm going to be
interested to see what the
future is going to bring
around extension methods about. Cause
you know, we talked about
Ruby a little bit a
while back and one of
the examples that came up
was when someone in Ruby
types, 20 dot minutes ago,
right. And then that comes
up with like, you know,
date time for 20 minutes
ago. And the example is
always made that a Oh,
well, we can do that
in C sharp. And then
someone goes and writes a
pretty complicated extension library that
extends. And then you can
have 20 dot minutes parentheses
go parentheses and you get
a similar experience, but it's
not Ruby actually that made
that happen. It's the it's
that Ruby core lives that
are added on it's some
of the rail stuff. So
it's not the guy that
had been in Ruby who
decided that 29 minutes ago
is supposed to look like
that. It was, it was
Hannah Meyer Hanson. It was DHH
the guy that made rails.
Yeah. But the aesthetic, right?
The decision as a community
that we find this to
be attractive and useful was
really what drove that. So
I feel like extension methods
are kind of taking a
little bit of the responsibility
for the syntax and the
future of C-sharp and, and
VB out of Anders hands,
right out of Andrews housework,
hands and kind of into
the hands of the community.
Cause if we, as a
collective decide that we feel
that a syntax should look
this way, or there's some
aspect of the base class
library, we could create a
little, you know, base class
library extension to add, you
know, whatever we, as a
community come up with. And
just as the, you know,
the system.xml.link team works with
a system that XML guys
to make that bridge clean,
such that it's seamless. I
mean, you really have no
way of knowing that these
are extension methods, right? Unless
you go looking for it,
you know, what kinds of
interesting patterns could be done?
And like in the past,
a lot of the patterns
have been very O focused
and we read books like
design patterns, what will extension
methods, what kinds of patterns
will come out of that
new way of thinking? And
I'm really interested in, in
that space and I'd be
interested in what the, the
listeners think about that. All
right. Good. Well, is that
a show? Yeah, I think
so. You can tell, I
kind of rambled a little
bit at the end, but
I am sincerely interested in
that kind of that space
and I'd be really interested
in some feedback from some
of the listeners. Maybe we
can do a whole show
on exactly how to do
extension methods or maybe a
DNR TV. Oh, that sounds
great. Alright, Scott, thank you
very much. And until next
time, we'll see you .